Linux Service 
Linux services, often referred to as "daemons" in Unix-like systems, 
are background processes that typically start at boot time and 
run continuously while the system is on. They provide various functionalities 
that the system and the users can utilize. 

Here are some key concepts and commands associated with services in Linux:
Key Concepts
Daemons: These are the background services that run on a Linux system, 
often without direct user interaction. Examples include web servers, 
file servers, and database servers.

Systemd: Modern Linux distributions use systemd as an init system and service manager. 
It is responsible for initializing the system and managing system processes after booting. 

Service Management: Involves starting, stopping, enabling, disabling, and checking the status of services.

Logs: Services generate logs, 
which are crucial for troubleshooting and monitoring service performance and issues.

Concept of Server-Client;
When deploying a service, you may want to make it accessible for other users.

Key Commands
systemctl: The primary command to manage systemd services. Examples of usage include:

systemctl start [service_name]: Start a service.
systemctl stop [service_name]: Stop a service.
systemctl restart [service_name]: Restart a service.
systemctl status [service_name]: Check the status of a service.
systemctl enable [service_name]: Enable a service to start on boot.
systemctl disable [service_name]: Disable a service from starting on boot.


journalctl: Used to view logs managed by systemd, particularly useful for troubleshooting.

ps and top: Commands to view running processes, which can include active services.

netstat and ss: Useful for checking network connections and ports, 
which can help ascertain if network-based services are running correctly.

Understanding and managing services is crucial for maintaining a healthy Linux system, 
especially in server environments where these services are critical for day-to-day operations.

Now we will observe how all works together 
Lab1 Setting up a MySQL database on an Ubuntu-based machine and performing basic 
CRUD (Create, Read, Update, Delete)  

Lab2 then open port and make it accessible through our local network. 
install a client and connect to Mysql server

LAB1: Create MYSQL SERVER SERVICE ON OUR VM; 

1. Installing MySQL Server on Ubuntu
Update Package Index: Open a terminal and update your package index:

sudo apt update

Install MySQL Server:

sudo apt install mysql-server

Secure MySQL Installation: After installation, run the included security script. 
This will set a password for the root user, remove anonymous users, 
disallow root login remotely, and remove test databases.

sudo mysql_secure_installation


Check MySQL Service: Ensure that the MySQL service is running.

systemctl status mysql.service


2. Accessing MySQL Command Line

Log into MySQL: As the root user, log into the MySQL shell. 
You might be prompted for the password you set during the mysql_secure_installation step.

sudo mysql -u root -p

3. Creating a Database and Table
Create a New Database: Let’s create a database named testdb.

CREATE DATABASE testdb;

Use the Database: Switch to the database you just created.

USE testdb;

Create a Table: Create a simple table named employees. 
This table will have three columns: id, name, and position.


CREATE TABLE employees (
    id INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
    name VARCHAR(100),
    position VARCHAR(100)
);


4. CRUD Operations

Create (Insert Data):

INSERT INTO employees (name, position) VALUES ('John Doe', 'Software Engineer');
INSERT INTO employees (name, position) VALUES ('Jane Smith', 'Project Manager');

Read (Select Data):

SELECT * FROM employees;


Update (Modify Data):

UPDATE employees SET position = 'Senior Software Engineer' WHERE name = 'John Doe';

Delete (Remove Data):

DELETE FROM employees WHERE name = 'Jane Smith';


5. Exiting MySQL Shell

Exit MySQL Shell: Once you are done with your operations, you can exit the MySQL shell by typing:

EXIT;

Lab2 Opening our Mysql Server to the world:) 
Well in our case to our local network

next steps involve creating a new MySQL user, 
setting up MySQL to allow connections from other machines in the network, 
and then connecting to the MySQL server from another machine to perform CRUD operations.

Part 1: Creating a New MySQL User
Log into MySQL as Root: 
If you're not already in the MySQL shell, log in as the root user:

sudo mysql -u root -p

CREATE USER 'newuser'@'%' IDENTIFIED BY 'user_password';

Grant Permissions: Grant all privileges to the new user on the testdb database.

GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON testdb.* TO 'newuser'@'%';

Apply Changes: Make the changes take effect.

FLUSH PRIVILEGES;

Exit MySQL Shell:

EXIT;


Part 2: Configuring MySQL to Allow Remote Connections
Edit MySQL Configuration: Open the MySQL configuration file in a text editor. 
For example, using nano:


sudo nano /etc/mysql/mysql.conf.d/mysqld.cnf

Change Bind Address: Find the line with bind-address and change its value to 0.0.0.0 
to allow connections from all IP addresses, or specify a specific IP address 
if you want to restrict access.

bind-address = 0.0.0.0


Restart MySQL Service: Apply the changes by restarting MySQL.

sudo systemctl restart mysql.service

Part 3: Connecting from Another Machine
Install MySQL Client: On the other machine in your network 
(assuming it's also running Ubuntu), 
install the MySQL client.


sudo apt update
sudo apt install mysql-client

Connect to the MySQL Server: Use the following command, 
replacing server_ip, newuser, and user_password 
with the appropriate values.

(learn server ip address my running ifconfig, if not installed run
sudo apt install net-tools)

mysql -h server_ip -u newuser -p

Execute CRUD Commands: Once connected, you can use the same CRUD commands 
as before to interact with the testdb database.

Extra Cleanup and Potential Security Issues:
To delete a database in MySQL, you'll use the DROP DATABASE command. 
This command will completely remove the database and all of its contents, 
so be absolutely sure you want to delete it, as this action is irreversible.

Here are the steps to delete a database:

Log into MySQL: First, you need to log into the MySQL shell. 
If you're using a MySQL root user, you can use the following command:


sudo mysql -u root -p

You'll be prompted to enter the password for the MySQL root user.

Select the Database (Optional): 
This step is more about double-checking that you're deleting the correct database.
List all databases using:

SHOW DATABASES;

Find the database you want to delete in the list.

Delete the Database: Use the DROP DATABASE command followed by the name of the database 
you want to delete. Replace database_name with the name of your database:


DROP DATABASE database_name;

Be cautious with this command as it will delete the entire database and its data.

Confirm Deletion (Optional): If you want to make sure the database has been deleted, 
list all databases again:

SHOW DATABASES;
The deleted database should no longer appear in this list.

Exit MySQL Shell: Once you're done, you can exit the MySQL shell:
EXIT;

To completely remove MySQL server and client, 
and stop any currently running MySQL service on an Ubuntu-based system, 
you will need to follow several steps. Here's a detailed guide:

1. Stopping MySQL Service
Before uninstalling MySQL, it's good practice to stop the service first.

Stop MySQL Service:

sudo systemctl stop mysql

2. Uninstalling MySQL Server
To remove MySQL server from your system, you will use the apt package manager.

Uninstall MySQL Server:

sudo apt-get remove --purge mysql-server mysql-client mysql-common

Remove Dependencies: After removing MySQL, you might want to remove unused dependencies.

sudo apt-get autoremove

Delete MySQL Files: This step removes all MySQL data and configuration files.

sudo rm -rf /etc/mysql /var/lib/mysql
sudo apt-get purge mysql-server-core-* mysql-client-core-*

3. Uninstalling MySQL Client
If you also installed the MySQL client separately, you can remove it using:

sudo apt-get remove --purge mysql-client

4. Clean Up
After uninstallation, you might want to remove residual package data.

sudo apt-get autoremove
sudo apt-get autoclean

5. Check for Active MySQL Processes (Optional)
After uninstallation, you can check if any MySQL processes are still running:

ps -A | grep mysql

If you see any MySQL processes, you can kill them using their process ID (PID):

sudo kill -9 [PID]